1) What is django? What are built in functionalities provided by django?
 Django is a high-level Python web framework that helps build secure, scalable applications quickly.
 It provides built-in features like an ORM for database handling, an admin panel for managing data,
 URL routing, authentication, session management, form handling, middleware support, and strong security
 protections. These reduce boilerplate code and let developers focus on core application logic.

2) Explain MVT architecutre of Django?
 Django uses the MVT (Model–View–Template) architecture. The Model manages the database structure
 and data operations, the View contains the application logic and processes user requests, and the
 Template handles the UI/layout shown to the user. Django’s framework connects these components
 automatically, helping developers build clean, maintainable applications.

3) What is ORM features of Django?
 Django’s ORM (Object-Relational Mapping) allows developers to interact with the database using Python
 classes instead of writing SQL queries. It simplifies CRUD operations, ensures security, reduces errors,
 and supports multiple databases. ORM improves productivity by letting developers focus on business logic
 rather than database code.

4) What do u mean by CSRF_Token
 A CSRF token is a unique, hidden security value added to forms to prevent Cross-Site Request Forgery attacks.
 It ensures that only requests coming from your own website (authenticated) are accepted, protecting users from unauthorized or
 malicious actions.
 Servers generate unique, unpredictable tokens per session/form, embedding them hidden in HTML.
 Browser auto-sends token with requests; server validates match before processing—blocks cross-site forgery.
 Rotate tokens post-submit for security.

5) What is render function?
  The render function in Django combines a template with a context dictionary and returns an HTML
  response to the browser. It simplifies the process of passing data to templates and generating
  server-side views.

6) How does django handle user auth?
 Django includes a built-in authentication system that manages user login, logout, password hashing,
 permissions, sessions, and user creation. It provides ready to use views, middleware, and database
 models to implement secure authentication easily.

7) what is the use of django admin tool?
 Django Admin is an auto generated backend interface that allows administrators to manage data, users,
 and models without coding. It supports CRUD operations and provides filters, search, and permission management.

8) what is jinja2 template?
 Jinja2 is a fast, expressive templating engine used by Django (through Django templates) to dynamically
 generate HTML. It supports variables, loops, filters, and conditional statements to render data from views.
 Jinja2 template is a Python-powered engine for generating dynamic content like HTML from text files with placeholders.
 Uses {{ variables }} for data insertion, {% tags %} for logic (loops, ifs, inheritance), and filters for formatting
 replaces placeholders with context data during render for safe, efficient templating in Flask/Django.
 Supports inheritance for reusable base layouts and auto-escapes HTML to prevent XSS.

9) what is the difference between context and context processor?
Context is the data passed from a specific view to a template during rendering.
A context processor is a function that automatically injects common data into every
template (such as user info or settings) without passing it manually in each view.

10) What is django middleware?
 Django middleware is a layer between the request and response cycle that processes requests globally.
 It handles tasks such as authentication, sessions, security, CSRF protection, caching, and request
 modification before reaching the view.

11) what db are supported in django?
 Django officially supports PostgreSQL, MySQL, SQLite, and Oracle. It also supports other databases
 through third-party backends like MongoDB and MariaDB.

12) explain q objects in ORM query
Q objects allow complex queries using OR, AND, and NOT conditions. They help create dynamic filters
and combine multiple conditions in a single query without writing raw SQL.

13) what is model realtionship ? what are the difference model relationships in django?
A model relationship defines how database tables connect. Django supports three main relationships:
One-to-One (OneToOneField), One-to-Many (ForeignKey), and Many-to-Many (ManyToManyField). These map
real-world data relationships inside models.
One-to-One (OneToOneField): Single record links to exactly one other (e.g., User to Profile); uses on_delete for cascade/protect.​
Many-to-One/ForeignKey: Multiple records link to one parent (e.g., Books to Author); creates foreign key column in child table.​
Many-to-Many (ManyToManyField): Multiple records link both ways (e.g., Students to Courses); auto-creates join table for flexibility.​

14) explain the purpose of django migrations?
Migrations track changes to models and apply them to the database without manual SQL. They ensure
the database schema stays in sync with model definitions as you modify fields, tables, and relationships.

15) what do you mean by django lookups?
 Django lookups are query filters used in ORM queries to match patterns or conditions, such as exact,
 contains, icontains, gt, lt, range, and startswith. They allow detailed filtering on model fields without writing SQL.
 Django lookups are the suffixes you add to model field names in queries (using double underscores) to specify how Django
 should filter data, like “equals”, “contains”, “greater than”, etc. For example, if there is a Book model with a price
 field, Book.objects.filter(price__gt=500) returns all books whose price is greater than 500, where price is the field
 and gt (greater than) is the lookup.


16) What are different types of permission in DRF?
  AllowAny: Permits access to everyone, authenticated or not (default if unspecified).​
  IsAuthenticated: Requires user login; denies anonymous requests.
​  IsAdminUser: Limits to staff users with is_staff=True and is_superuser=True.​
  IsAuthenticatedOrReadOnly: Allows safe methods (GET, HEAD, OPTIONS) for anyone, but changes require authentication.​

17) What are different types of authentication in drf?

BasicAuthentication: Username/password per request (insecure without HTTPS).​
SessionAuthentication: Cookie-based, suits browser apps.​
TokenAuthentication: Stateless tokens exchanged for credentials on login.
JWTAuthentication (via djangorestframework-simplejwt): JSON Web Tokens for expiration and refresh.​

18) What is token authentication ? how to implement token auth?
Token Authentication
Token auth exchanges login credentials for a unique token stored in rest_framework.authtoken.Token model, linked to a user. Clients include it in headers as Authorization: Token <your_token_key> for requests; DRF sets request.user and request.auth on success.
​
Implementation Steps
Install and add 'rest_framework.authtoken' to INSTALLED_APPS in settings.py.
Run python manage.py migrate to create the token table.
Configure in settings.py:
text
REST_FRAMEWORK = {
    'DEFAULT_AUTHENTICATION_CLASSES': ['rest_framework.authentication.TokenAuthentication'],
    'DEFAULT_PERMISSION_CLASSES': ['rest_framework.permissions.IsAuthenticated'],
}
Generate tokens: Use python manage.py drf_create_token <username> (or -r to regenerate), or programmatically via Token.objects.create(user=user). Views like ObtainAuthToken handle login/token issuance.
​
​
